.\" Copyright (c) 2022 Valery Ushakov
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING,
.\" BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED
.\" AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\" OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd October 23, 2022
.Dt PLINK 1 PRM
.Os CLU
.Sh NAME
.Nm plink
.Nd link CLU programs
.\"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl v
.Op Fl -debug\| Ns No \&| Ns Fl -opt
.Op Fl -verbose
.Op Fl \&-
.Ar linker options \&...
.\"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
links
.Tn CLU
programs compiled by the portable
.Tn CLU
compiler
.Xr pclu 1 .
It is a simple wrapper script around the system linker.
The options to
.Nm
documented below must come first on its command line, the first option
that is not recognized by the wrapper and the remainder of the command
line are passed to the linker directly.
You can also use
.Fl \&-
to tell
.Nm
to pass the rest of the arguments on
.Po
e.g. to pass
.Fl v
to the linker
.Pc .
.\"
.Bl -tag -width Fl
.It Fl debug , Fl -debug
Link the output with the in-process
.Tn CLU
debugger and debug version of the
.Tn CLU
library.
See
.Xr pclu 1
for more information.
Currently this disables
.Tn ASLR .
.It Fl opt , Fl -opt
Link the output with the optimized version of the
.Tn CLU
library.
This is the default.
.It Fl v , Fl -verbose
Print the linker command executed by
.Nm .
.El
.\"
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -width Ev
.\"
.It Ev CLUCC
The
.Tn C
compiler used to link the output.
If not set, the value of
.Ev CC
environment variable is used, otherwise
.Xr cc 1 .
.\"
.It Ev CLUHOME
The CLU library location.
.El
